Skip to content
Bernard Marr | Logo Black
Search for:

Toggle Navigation
General | Rapid Solutions
About
Services
Articles
Clients
Books
Events
Podcasts
Data Strategy Course
Videos
Contact Us
enEnglish

Written by

Bernard Marr
Bernard Marr is a world-renowned futurist, influencer and thought leader in the fields of business and technology, with a passion for using technology for the good of humanity. He is a best-selling author of over 20 books, writes a regular column for Forbes and advises and coaches many of the world’s best-known organisations. He has a combined following of 4 million people across his social media channels and newsletters and was ranked by LinkedIn as one of the top 5 business influencers in the world.

Bernard’s latest books are ‘Future Skills’, ‘The Future Internet’, ‘Business Trends in Practice’ and ‘Generative AI in Practice’.

Generative AI Book Launch
View My Latest Books
Follow Me
How Much Data Do We Create Every Day? The Mind-Blowing Stats Everyone Should Read
The amount of data we produce every day is truly mind-boggling. There are 2.5 quintillion bytes of data created each day at our current pace, but that pace is only accelerating with the growth of the Internet of Things (IoT). Over the last two years alone 90 percent of the data in the world was generated. This is worth re-reading! While it’s almost impossible to wrap your mind around these numbers, I gathered together some of my favorite stats to help illustrate some of the ways we create these colossal amounts of data every single day.


Internet

With so much information at our fingertips, we’re adding to the data stockpile every time we turn to our search engines for answers.

We conduct more than half of our web searches from a mobile phone now.
More than 7 billion humans use the internet (that’s a growth rate of 7.5 percent over 2016).
On average, Google now processes more than 40,000 searches EVERY second (3.5 billion searches per day)!
While 77% of searches are conducted on Google, it would be remiss not to remember other search engines are also contributing to our daily data generation. Worldwide there are 5 billion searches a day.
Social Media

Our current love affair with social media certainly fuels data creation. According to Domo’s Data Never Sleeps 5.0 report, these are numbers generated every minute of the day:

Snapchat users share 527,760 photos
More than 120 professionals join LinkedIn
Users watch 4,146,600 YouTube videos
456,000 tweets are sent on Twitter
Instagram users post 46,740 photos
With 2 billion active users Facebook is still the largest social media platform. Let that sink in a moment—more than a quarter of the world’s 7 billion humans are active on Facebook! Here are some more intriguing Facebook statistics:

32 billion people are active on Facebook daily
Europe has more than 307 million people on Facebook
There are five new Facebook profiles created every second!
More than 300 million photos get uploaded per day
Every minute there are 510,000 comments posted and 293,000 statuses updated
Even though Facebook is the largest social network, Instagram (also owned by Facebook) has shown impressive growth. Here’s how this photo-sharing platform is adding to our data deluge:

There are 600 million Instagrammers; 400 million who are active every day
Each day 95 million photos and videos are shared on Instagram
100 million people use the Instagram “stories” feature daily
Communication

We leave a data trail when we use our favorite communication methods today from sending texts to emails. Here are some incredible stats for the volume of communication we send out every minute:

We send 16 million text messages
There are 990,000 Tinder swipes
156 million emails are sent; worldwide it is expected that there will be 9 billion email users by 2019
15,000 GIFs are sent via Facebook messenger
Every minute there are 103,447,520 spam emails sent
There are 154,200 calls on Skype
Digital Photos

Now that our smartphones are exemplary cameras as well, everyone is a photog and the trillions of photos stored is the proof. Since there are no signs of this slowing down, expect these digital photo numbers to continue to grow:

People will take 1.2 trillion photos by the end of 2017
There will be 4.7 trillion photos stored
Services

There are some really interesting statistics coming out of businesses and service providers in our new platform-driven economy. Here are just a few numbers that are generated every minute that piqued my interest:

The Weather Channel receives 18,055,556 forecast requests
Venmo processes $51,892 peer-to-peer transactions
Spotify adds 13 new songs
Uber riders take 45,788 trips!
There are 600 new page edits to Wikipedia
Internet of Things

The Internet of Things, connected “smart” devices that interact with each other and us while collecting all kinds of data, is exploding (from 2 billion devices in 2006 to a projected 200 billion by 2020) and is one of the primary drivers for our data vaults exploding as well.

Let’s take a look at just some of the stats and predictions for just one type of device, voice search:

There are 33 million voice-first devices in circulation
8 million people use voice control each month
Voice search queries in Google for 2016 were up 35 times over 2008
Now that you are armed with these numbers, consider all the ways that you generate data as you go about your day. Once you are aware of all the data you create as a single individual, you can start to imagine just how much data we collectively generate every single day. What’s more, these already mind-blowing stats are growing at an ever-increasing rate as more of our world becomes digitized and ‘datafied’.

Business Trends In Practice | Bernard Marr
Related Articles

Why AI Models Are Collapsing And What It Means For The Future Of Technology
Artificial intelligence has revolutionized everything from customer service to content creation, giving us tools like ChatGPT and Google Gemini, which can generate human-like text or images with remarkable accuracy.[...]

Read More

Where Will Artificial Intelligence Take Us In The Future?
Just a few years back, if you had been told that by 2024, you would be able to have a conversation with a computer that would seem almost completely human, would you have believed it?[...]

Read More

AI: Overhyped Fantasy Or Truly The Next Industrial Revolution?
The term “fourth industrial revolution” has been used in recent years to describe the transformative impact that many believe AI and automation will have on human society.[...]

Read More

The World On Edge: 5 Global Mega Threats That Could Reshape Our Future
In an era of unprecedented global interconnectedness, humanity faces a perfect storm of challenges that threaten to reshape our world.[...]

Read More

The Biggest Healthcare Trends Of The Next 10 Years
Although my work usually involves advising businesses on changes and trends that are just around the corner, sometimes it’s also interesting to look a little further ahead.[...]

Read More

Is The AI Bubble About To Burst?
Following a turbulent few weeks in the stock market, there’s a lot of speculation that the AI “bubble” may be about to burst.[...]

Read More

Sign up to Stay in Touch!
Bernard Marr is a world-renowned futurist, influencer and thought leader in the fields of business and technology, with a passion for using technology for the good of humanity.

He is a best-selling author of over 20 books, writes a regular column for Forbes and advises and coaches many of the world’s best-known organisations.

He has a combined following of 4 million people across his social media channels and newsletters and was ranked by LinkedIn as one of the top 5 business influencers in the world.

Bernard’s latest book is ‘Generative AI in Practice’.

Sign Up Today
Social Media
1,492,696
Followers
175,264
Followers
24,548
Followers
1,568,060
Subscribers
136,293
Followers
61,441
Subscribers
1,908,566
Yearly Views
10,000,000
Readers
Podcasts
  
View Podcasts
© Bernard Marr 2024

Web, SEO & Social Media by 123 Internet

Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy

Manage consent
Go to Top
1