
Can online classes change the game for some students?
Log in
Sign up
Log in
Sign up
Breaking new ground

Can online classes change the game for some students?
The 2024 Washington State Teacher of the Year believes the answer is yes—and she’s innovating new techniques to support them.

By Bill Gates| July 30, 2024  5 minute read

 
 
 
When I was in high school, one of my favorite classes was drama. A teacher pushed me to sign up, and I was fully prepared to hate it—but I fell in love with acting. Drama pushed me to broaden myself, try something new, and see if I could succeed. I even gained enough confidence to audition for—and get—the lead in “Black Comedy,” the school play my senior year.

Blaire Penry, the 2024 Washington State Teacher of the Year, understands how transformative a class like drama can be, because she’s seen it happen with her own students. And I was blown away by how she uses technology to reimagine how students engage in the classroom.


Blaire teaches career and technical education, or CTE, and fine arts in the Auburn School District, which is located about 30 miles south of Seattle. Over the years, she has taught a wide range of electives—including marketing, worksite learning, career choices, and psychology, in addition to drama—to both middle and high school students.

What really sets Blaire apart, though, is her approach to online education. When schools switched to remote instruction in March 2020 because of the COVID-19 pandemic, Blaire quickly realized that the existing curriculum didn’t work. It just wasn’t engaging enough without the face-to-face interaction. At the time, her school district was doing fully synchronous instruction. Teachers did live instruction, students could ask questions, and classes operated on the same schedule as before. Still, her students struggled to connect with the material from their homes.

So, she helped develop a new curriculum that worked in an online setting and innovated new techniques to keep her students engaged.

Blaire created new materials and lesson plans that resonated more with Auburn students, 76 percent of whom are people of color—including a new social justice curriculum aimed at helping her kids become more active and informed citizens. Homeroom became a structured social period where students could get to know their teacher and each other, since the normal opportunities to connect—over lunch, or in the hallway between classes—aren’t available in online instruction. The chat function was used constantly throughout her classes, with Blaire checking in to make sure students were engaged and the kids asking (and answering!) questions about the material.

“It gave me this moment to dismantle my curriculum and build it back up with my community in mind, which is such a gift,” Blaire told me. “I found that creative challenge incredibly fulfilling, and it gave me a chance to, I think, become a better teacher.”

The work that Blaire and her colleagues did was eventually spun off into Auburn Online School. Although schools reopened in Washington in 2021 and many students returned in-person, a lot of students in her district continued to opt for remote instruction. Many of them lived in intergenerational households, with older family members who were at risk of becoming seriously ill from COVID-19. Auburn Online gave them a safe, high-quality option for continuing their education.

The Gates Foundation supported a lot of schools that offered this kind of support during the pandemic, so I wasn’t surprised to hear that some students continued to learn remotely to keep their loved ones safe. But what stunned me was how many kids wanted to stick with online instruction for reasons that had nothing to do with the pandemic.

Although many students struggled with the transition to online learning and lack of face-to-face interaction with their teachers and peers, Blaire found that a number of her kids not only adapted but thrived. Some needed extra flexibility so they could work a job or keep up with other responsibilities. Others benefited from having greater control of their learning environments. For example, they could focus much better in the comparative quiet of their own homes, or they had less anxiety when they could answer a question in a chat rather than by raising their hands in front of the whole class.

It blew my mind to learn that fully remote instruction works better for some students. Like many people, I’ve always thought of it as a necessary obstacle to overcome in times of necessity. But Blaire sees it as a tremendous opportunity for some families—and as a powerful tool for driving equity.

I was especially fascinated to hear how she teaches drama. I didn’t think it was a class that would lend itself well to online instruction, but Blaire convinced me otherwise.

“One of the things that is really fun about teaching drama online is that it gives students the space to explore and try things out in ways they might not with all eyes on them in a classroom,” she told me. For example, Blaire sets her students up in breakout rooms, where they can practice in small groups or with her. When it comes time to perform a monologue, they record it—and if they don’t like their performance, they just try it again until they have a version they’re comfortable with other people seeing.

“Some of my students might not have taken a drama class,” she says. “But when you release some of that immediate pressure of performing, you give them permission to be creative in ways they haven’t explored before.”

Blaire is clear that online education isn’t the right fit for everyone. But she’s a firm believer that families deserve it as an option.

Because she is such a big thinker about how technology can help students, I couldn’t resist the opportunity to ask her what she thinks about AI. Blaire is excited about how AI tools will help her better track her students’ progress and provide them with personalized tutors—two use cases I recently saw firsthand in Newark, NJ.

She hopes that teachers are given adequate training on using AI, especially given the biases it can reinforce. Blaire told me about a technology showcase she recently attended. The facilitator was showing off how AI can help teachers save time and asked it to put together a top ten list of recommended reading material for middle schoolers. Every author on the list was white, and almost all of them were men.

This is a solvable problem. AI can be programmed to be more representative and thoughtful in its answers—but it’s going to require input from brilliant teachers like Blaire, who understand the potential and limits of technology in the classroom.

“Online learning creates an opportunity for teachers to be a little bit fearless,” Blaire says. “It’s an opportunity to examine your students, examine your community, and then put it in the forefront of how you’re going to move forward. It’s exciting to try something new, be innovative, and disrupt the norm.”

I couldn’t agree more.

Read this next

My trip to the frontier of AI education
First Avenue Elementary School in Newark is pioneering the use of AI tools in the classroom.


Sal Khan is pioneering innovation in education…again
Brave New Words paints an inspiring picture of AI in the classroom.


The road ahead reaches a turning point in 2024
This year signaled the start of a new era. Here’s why I believe next year is an opportunity to shape the world’s next chapter for the better.

Discussion
Thank you for being part of the Gates Notes Insider community. Not seeing your comment? You can read our policy on moderating comments here and learn about our Gates Notes badges here.
Please
log in
or
sign up
to comment
116
responses
Sort by
all
Костя Ч

1 day ago
I am reading. Thank you.

Latifo Mudallali

1 day ago
We need books to clarify the way AI works. We need programming languages to understand and learn how to write and execute programs. Only Mr. Gates can help these things become true through his beautiful power of book recommendation.

Sharon Wang

6 days ago
Interesting initiative. It's cool that you are actively promoting the use of mainstream AI in classrooms. I wonder if these tools are more of a hindrance than a help in aiding students to learn organically. Why are human brains/textbooks/computer support insufficient in helping relay knowledge? Unless you can get AI to automatically download said information into our minds or increase our innate IQ, does it really help us to become more efficient at learning?



I've been following you sporadically since 2020 as a UChicago PhD and find your work to be very inspiring. So thanks very much for your dependable input on mainstream technological progression. Probably misunderstanding your tone in a recent podcast interview on superhuman AI, but not entirely sure what you mean when you say that humans can sometimes go haywire and need to be monitored as well. Just noting that since my personal experience with non-mainstream AI has been off.

Salissou Malam Moussa

7 days ago
Merci beaucoup pour l ajout dans votre communauté Gates notes insister.en effet les cours en ligne sont plus utiles que des théâtres,car plusieurs étudiants ont eu leurs diplômes en ligne,en plus les cours en ligne aident pour étudier a l international.

Dolores Turnwall

11 days ago
Good morning,

So I saw the “ DonorsChoose Match Day” email this morning. I’m working with an immigrant family , the father is an Ecuadoran teacher. Last Saturday I spent $320.00 to give them a way to earn money. The brother and sister were standing under the shade of a tree in the Home Depot parking lot with other immigrants. They laid down mulch around recently planted shrubs. Bought food and drinks for $20 and paid each $150 . Noticed that their phones were in bad shape. They are seeking employment while they are in the legal process of obtaining their citizenship. I have limited fund with SS , but have returned to work 2 weeks . A good phone is almost a necessity for employment today. I need 4 smartphones. Two for the teacher whose family is still in Ecuador, and 2 for his sister and her husband who are here in Florida. Any donation of a smartphone is appreciated.

 
 
 
 
About Bill
Search
Personal
Podcast
Photo essays
Books
Education
Videos
Saving lives
Climate and energy
Pandemic prevention
Inequality, gender, and race
Subscribe to emails from Bill
First name
Last name
michael@ufc.br
Sign up
© 2024 The Gates Notes LLC Privacy Policy Terms of Use Contact
