
My trip to the frontier of AI education
Log in
Sign up
Log in
Sign up
School of thought

My trip to the frontier of AI education
First Avenue Elementary School in Newark is pioneering the use of AI tools in the classroom.

By Bill Gates| July 09, 2024  4 minute read

 
 
 
When I was a kid, my parents took me to the World’s Fair in Seattle. It was amazing to see all these fantastic technologies that felt like something out of a science fiction novel. I asked them to take me back multiple times during the six months it was open here, and I remember walking away from the fairgrounds each time feeling that I had just caught a glimpse of the future.

That feeling came back to me recently as I walked out of a classroom in Newark, New Jersey.


In May, I had the chance to visit the First Avenue Elementary School, where they’re pioneering the use of AI education in the classroom. The Newark School District is piloting Khanmigo, an AI-powered tutor and teacher support tool, and I couldn’t wait to see it for myself.

I’ve written a lot about Khanmigo on this blog. It was developed by Khan Academy, a terrific partner of the Gates Foundation. And I think Sal Khan, the founder of Khan Academy, is a visionary when it comes to harnessing the power of technology to help kids learn. (You can read my review of his new book, Brave New Words, here.)

We’re still in the early days of using AI in classrooms, but what I saw in Newark showed me the incredible potential of the technology.

I was blown away by how creatively the teachers were using the tools. Leticia Colon, an eighth-grade algebra teacher, explained how she used AI to create problem sets about hometown heroes the students might be interested in. In February, Khanmigo helped her develop equations that incorporated Newark boxer Shakur Stevenson’s workout routines, so her students could practice math skills while learning about a real-world role model.

Cheryl Drakeford, a third-grade math and science teacher, talked about how she uses Khanmigo to help create rubrics and lesson hooks for assignments. The technology gives her a first draft, which she then tailors for her students. For example, the AI once gave her a hook that used a generic story about a fruit stand, and she edited it to be about Pokémon cards and Roblox—two topics her students are passionate about. “Khanmigo gives me the blueprint, but I have to give the delivery,” she said.

Several of the teachers I met with showed me how they can access each student’s dashboard and get a summary of how they’re doing in a particular subject. They loved being able to easily and quickly track a student’s progress, because it’s saving them a lot of time. They were also excited about how their students are using Khanmigo as a personalized tutor.

This technology is far from perfect at this point. Although the students I met loved using Khanmigo overall, they also mentioned that it struggled to pronounce Hispanic names and complained that its only voice option is male—which makes it clear how much thought must still be put into making the technology inclusive and engaging for all students. In an ideal world, the AI would know what the students in Ms. Drakeford’s class are into, so she wouldn’t have to do any editing. And Ms. Colon told me it took her several tries to get Khanmigo to give her what she wanted.

In other words, my visit to Newark showed me where we are starting from with AI in the classroom, not where the technology will end up eventually. It reinforced my belief that AI will be a total game-changer for both teachers and students once the technology matures. Even today, when the teachers at First Avenue delegate routine tasks to AI assistants, they reclaim time for what matters most: connecting with students, sparking curiosity, and making sure every child feels seen and supported—especially those who need a little extra help.

Khanmigo is just one of many AI-powered education tools in the pipeline, and the Gates Foundation is focused on ensuring these tools reach and support all students, not just a few. Our goal is that they help level the playing field, not widen existing gaps. We’re currently working with educators across the country to get feedback and make the technology more responsive to their needs. Visits like the one I took to Newark are part of that process. It was fantastic to learn what teachers were enthused about and see how different students are engaging with AI.

The educators I met in Newark are true pioneers. Some were on the cutting edge, constantly looking for new ways to use AI in their classroom. Others were using it in a more limited fashion. I was impressed by how the school was able to support each teacher’s comfort level with the technology. They’re putting a lot of thought into change management and making sure that no educator is forced to try things that won’t work in their classroom.  

That’s because, at the end of the day, teachers know best. If you hand them the right tools, they will always find a way to support their students. My visit to Newark left me more optimistic than ever that AI will help teachers do what they do best and free them up to focus on what matters most.

Read this next

Can online classes change the game for some students?
The 2024 Washington State Teacher of the Year believes the answer is yes—and she’s innovating new techniques to support them.


Sal Khan is pioneering innovation in education…again
Brave New Words paints an inspiring picture of AI in the classroom.


The road ahead reaches a turning point in 2024
This year signaled the start of a new era. Here’s why I believe next year is an opportunity to shape the world’s next chapter for the better.

Discussion
Thank you for being part of the Gates Notes Insider community. Not seeing your comment? You can read our policy on moderating comments here and learn about our Gates Notes badges here.
Please
log in
or
sign up
to comment
186
responses
Sort by
all
Zimbola SEO

10 days ago
In terms of AI education, prompt engineering jobs are really picking up. A course or a certification from a good institute ensures a promising career for the job aspirants in this field. Given the boom in LLMs, prompt engineers can be sure of good salaries and a future-proof career in one of the key AI domains.

Grace Mutombo

13 days ago
That's really amazing, I am honored to read this article and have discovered that, AI is the new progress, and being optimistic about it working in people's lives is the way to go. It really gives an hit to the one using it about how thinks has improved and how the future might be. I truly appreciate this article.

Ann Abour

17 days ago
Good to see the kids are cultivated with AI. Good to see the kids can pursue their life. Good to see Mr Gates took his trip to help the kids.

Rafael Bujotzek

24 days ago
Thank you for this inspiring insight into the educational lessons of the future. I will incorporate the knowledge into my new book on AI and mention the project.

Vijay Khanna

25 days ago
Difference between online teaching and offline teaching is that online teaching is more one to one and in a restricted plane, whereas offline is being in open house, spaceful feeling and therefore interaction is like in closed door and in open door respectively. This could be detailed with various plus and minus issues involved in each kind. Reach online is vast and one can put forth one's ideas, once by teacher and once by taught and others can join as a followup. The solemn environment of teaching offline is noticed and utilised in teaching as well as learning, as it takes one in a different plane of educational process. Coming to AI, online is likely to be more relevant and effective as the direction of teaching and guiding path of AI solution process is better controlled.

 
 
 
 
About Bill
Search
Personal
Podcast
Photo essays
Books
Education
Videos
Saving lives
Climate and energy
Pandemic prevention
Inequality, gender, and race
Subscribe to emails from Bill
First name
Last name
michael@ufc.br
Sign up
© 2024 The Gates Notes LLC Privacy Policy Terms of Use Contact
